JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
General H.R. McMaster will
become the national
security adviser.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
announces his
new national security adviser
after the controversial
ousting of Michael Flynn.
Then: the search to find closure
for families
who have lost loved ones on the
dangerous
journey across the U.S. southern
border.
ELY ORTIZ, Founder, Aguilas Del
Desierto (through
translator): Where's my brother?
What happened to him?
How did he die?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And our Politics
Monday team
takes stock of the first month
of the Trump
presidency.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president has
a new national
security adviser tonight.
He named Army Lieutenant General
H.R. McMaster
today, a week after retired
General Michael
Flynn was forced out and after
the first choice
for a replacement turned it
down.
Retired Army Lieutenant General
Keith Kellogg
will serve as the Security
Council's chief
of staff.
Mr. Trump made the announcement
at his Mar-a-Lago
resort in Florida.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
He's a man of tremendous talent
and tremendous
experience.
I watched and read a lot over
last two days.
He is highly respected by
everybody in the
military and we're very honored
to have him.
H.R. MCMASTER, U.S. National
Security Adviser:
I would just like to say what a
privilege
it is to be able to continue
serving our nation.
I'm grateful to you for that
opportunity,
and I look forward to joining
the national
security team and doing
everything I can to
advance and protect the interest
of the American
people.
Thank you very much.
DONALD TRUMP: You're going to do
a great job.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For some
background on H.R.
McMaster: He's 54 years old and
currently
a three-star general in the U.S.
Army.
He graduated from West Point in
1984, and
later earned a Ph.D. in military
history.
His doctoral thesis, about the
failures of
military and political
leadership during the
Vietnam War, later became a
well-regarded
book titled "Dereliction of
Duty."
During the first Gulf War with
Iraq in 1991,
he lead a tank unit that
prevailed against
Iraq's powerful Republican
Guard.
He also lead American forces in
Iraq in 2005,
and successfully brought
stability to a city
that had been rife with ethnic
conflict.
For more on all of this, we turn
to Washington
Post reporter Greg Jaffe.
He has known McMaster for years.
Greg Jaffe, welcome back to the
program.
You were just telling me you
have known him,
what, for 14 years?
GREG JAFFE, The Washington Post:
Yes, I think
2002.
JUDY WOODRUFF: 2002.
What should we know about him?
GREG JAFFE: He's fiercely
opinionated.
He's very, very smart.
He's passionate.
He's funny.
He understands the media, I
think, and talks
to reporters, interestingly.
I don't think he views them as
the enemy.
And, you know, I think the one
knock against
him is, when he believes he's
right, he passionately
argues that point and he doesn't
stop.
And I think, after a while, that
can be too
much for folks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tell me about his
military
career.
We were just reporting he had a
very successful
career during the first Iraq --
the Gulf War.
What made him so successful?
GREG JAFFE: Well, during the
first Gulf War,
he was involved in the Battle of
73 Easting
there.
And so he was a tank company
commander.
And his tank company prevailed
against a much
larger unit of the Iraqi
Republican Guard.
His real fame, though, came
later in Iraq
in 2006.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what made him
so successful?
GREG JAFFE: You know, he was his
group, I
think "The New Yorker" described
them as -- his
unit in Iraq as rebels against
an incoherent
strategy was a great line from
"The New Yorker."
And at that time, the strategy
in the U.S.
was, we will stand -- the U.S.
strategy in
Iraq was, we will stand down as
the Iraqis
stand up.
It was training the Iraqi
forces.
He went against that and said,
look, we can't
train the Iraqi forms until we
stabilize the
situation.
So he pushed his troops into the
city of Tal
Afar, established 29 outposts in
the city,
and really stopped the killing
and the violence,
and then focused on rebuilding.
So, it became a strategy known
as clear, hold
and build.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clear, hold and
build.
How is he viewed, Greg Jaffe, by
the rest
of the Army, by the military?
GREG JAFFE: I think, in many
cases, with great
admiration, because he's so
frank, he's so
smart.
It's interesting, though.
When he was promoted from
colonel to one-star,
he was passed for promotion to
one-star general
twice.
And I think in some cases, that
was a reflection
on how frank he can be.
He doesn't hold back his
opinions and sometimes
that rubs folks the wrong way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there a
political philosophy
there, or are you talking about
a philosophy
of war, of fighting?
GREG JAFFE: A philosophy of war
and fighting.
He's not a political guy in any
way, shape
or form.
And I think that is interesting,
too.
I don't think he will bring --
he won't bring
very sharp political instincts
on the downside.
On the upside, he's not a
political ideologue.
He has very strong opinions
about war, though.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You were telling
me -- we were
talking about how he's a -- you
said he's
a prolific writer.
He's written a lot for -- we
were looking
at the Web site for the Hoover
Institution,
a conservative think tank.
A lot of it is about military
strategy, and
leadership, he writes about.
GREG JAFFE: And for The New York
Times.
I was just reading an op-ed he
wrote for The
New York Times which begins by
quoting Saul
Bellow, which is not something
you normally
hear from a U.S. Army officer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do but think --
based on what
know about him -- you were
saying, Greg Jaffe,
that he hasn't spent a lot of
time in Washington.
How do you see him fitting into
this city?
And he's going smack to the
middle of power
at the White House?
GREG JAFFE: Yes, I think that
will be interesting.
He has dealt a lot in Tal Afar
and then in
Iraq he ran -- or -- I'm sorry
-- in Afghanistan,
he ran an anti-corruption task
force for General
Petraeus in 2010.
And so that meant he had to deal
with a lot
of arms of government.
He had to deal with the State
Department.
He had to deal with the
intelligence agencies,
all those things that you have
to deal with
as a national security adviser.
He hasn't spent a lot of time
thinking and
worrying about politics in
Washington.
And I think that's going to be a
challenge
and a stretch for him, because
the national
security adviser job isn't
fundamentally a
political job, but he certainly
has to take
D.C. politics into account.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly,
he's going to
have a military man as his chief
of staff,
Keith Kellogg.
He's going to be dealing, of
course, with
a retired general at the
Pentagon.
We're seeing a lot of military
people in this
administration.
GREG JAFFE: Yes, that's right.
And it will be interesting.
That's an interesting dynamic,
isn't it?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's not a
position that
requires confirmation by the
Senate.
So, this is the president's
choice.
And it sounds like he's somebody
very different
from Michael Flynn.
GREG JAFFE: Yes, I think he is.
He is widely -- and I think
Flynn was widely
respected in the Army, but I
think he's seen
as a much more sort of steadying
figure than
Flynn would be, much less of an
erratic figure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Greg Jaffe with
The Washington
Post, thank you so much.
GREG JAFFE: Sure.
Thanks for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the day's
other news:
Thousands of anti-Trump
protesters turned
out in cities across the
country.
They called it Not My
President's Day.
Demonstrators marched, chanted
and carried
signs in New York, Chicago,
Washington and
Los Angeles, among other places.
They challenged Trump policies
on everything
from immigration to abortion.
British lawmakers debated today
whether to
rescind an invitation to
President Trump for
a state visit.
An online petition against it
has gathered
more than 1.8 million
signatures.
Thousands protested against the
president
outside Parliament today, as
lawmakers held
a nonbinding debate.
DAVID LAMMY, British Parliament:
I can't imagine
a leader of our own country, of
whatever political
stripe, behaving in that manner.
And it is for that reason that I
think people
are offended and concerned that
Britain should
abandon all its principles.
NIGEL EVANS, British Parliament:
I certainly
don't like some of the things
that he has
said in the past, but I do
respect the fact
that he stood on a platform on
which he is
now delivering.
He is going to go down in
history as being
roundly condemned for being the
only politician
to deliver on his promises.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Since the 1950s,
only two other
American presidents have
received the full
pomp and pageantry of a state
visit to Britain,
George W. Bush and Barack Obama.
The Russian ambassador to the
United Nations,
Vitaly Churkin, died suddenly
today.
Russian officials said he fell
ill at his
office in New York, and passed
away later
at a hospital.
He was a well-known figure in
Russian diplomatic
circles, and had been U.N.
ambassador since
2006.
Vitaly Churkin would have turned
65 years
old tomorrow.
In Iraq, government forces
advanced into the
southwestern outskirts of Mosul.
It's the second day of a new
offensive to
drive Islamic State fighters
from the city's
western half.
Police and army troops engaged
in gun battles
as they closed on the city's
airport.
They were backed by Iraqi
helicopters that
rocketed a village on a key
hill.
Back in this country, officials
in Northern
California kept a close eye on
swollen creeks
and rivers as the latest in a
series of huge
rainstorms rolled over the
region.
San Francisco reported record
rain totals,
surpassing the normal amount for
its entire
wet season.
To the south, in Santa Cruz
County, they counted
nearly three inches of rain in
24 hours, and
could get eight more.
And political circles are abuzz
after Milo
Yiannopoulos was disinvited to
address the
Conservative Political Action
Conference.
The planned speech by the highly
polarizing
Breitbart news editor had
already triggered
a social media backlash.
Then video clips resurfaced in
which Yiannopoulos
joked about pedophilia.
He called it -- quote -- "sloppy
phrasing,"
but CPAC organizers said that's
not enough.
And still to come on the
"NewsHour": mixed
messages about American support
for NATO;
searching for migrants who don't
survive the
treacherous journey to the U.S.
border; our
politics Monday team on the
latest political
news; and much more.
Top members of the Trump
administration have
been traveling overseas to calm
some raw nerves
among U.S. allies.
The main source of the concern?
Comments from President Trump
that led to
worries in Europe and beyond
about American
commitments to longstanding
alliances and
institutions.
John Yang has more.
JOHN YANG: Vice President Pence
spent his
holiday weekend hard at work,
trying to reassure
nervous leaders in Europe that
the United
States has their back.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
Whatever our differences, our
two continents
share the same heritage, the
same values and,
above all, the same purpose, to
promote peace
and prosperity through freedom,
democracy
and the rule of law.
JOHN YANG: In Brussels, the vice
president
underscored American support for
NATO and
for the European Union.
President Trump has called NATO
obsolete,
and praised Britain's decision
to abandon
the E.U.
At a campaign-style rally in
Florida this
weekend, Mr. Trump seemed to
soften his tone
a bit, even as he called again
for greater
burden-sharing among the allies.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I'm a NATO fan.
But many of the countries in
NATO, many of
the countries that we protect,
many of these
countries are very rich
countries.
They're not paying their bills.
JOHN YANG: Today, European
Council President
Donald Tusk welcomed the vice
president's
reassurance, but appealed for
unequivocal
American support.
DONALD TUSK, European Council
President: Too
many new, and sometimes
surprising, opinions
have been voiced over this time
about our
relations and our common
security for us to
pretend that everything is as it
used to be.
JOHN YANG: Separately, the head
of NATO said
he doesn't believe America first
means America
alone.
Republican Senator John McCain
issued his
own critique at the Munich
security conference.
Without naming the president, he
wondered
aloud what earlier leaders would
have said.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona: They
would be alarmed
by the growing inability, and
even unwillingness,
to separate truth from lies.
JOHN YANG: Meanwhile, Defense
Secretary James
Mattis made a stop in Iraq
today.
President Trump set off alarm
bells there
last month
DONALD TRUMP: If we kept the
oil, you probably
wouldn't have ISIS, because
that's where they
made their money in the first
place, so we
should have kept the oil.
But, OK, maybe we will have
another chance.
JOHN YANG: Today, Mattis walked
it all back.
JAMES MATTIS, U.S. Secretary of
Defense: All
of us in America have generally
paid for our
gas and oil all along, and I'm
sure that we
will continue to do so in the
future.
We're not in Iraq to seize
anybody's oil.
JOHN YANG: Mattis also promised
continued
U.S. support for Iraq's
offensive to retake
Mosul from the Islamic State.
We turn now to Steven Erlanger,
the London
bureau chief for The New York
Times.
Steve, thanks for joining us.
I should warn folks, I think we
have got a
little bit of a satellite delay
here.
But, Steve, how reassuring were
these visits
from the vice president, the
secretary of
defense, the secretary of state
to the European
leaders?
STEVEN ERLANGER, The New York
Times: Well,
they were reassuring up to a
point, but not
that reassuring, because, after
all, the president
of the United States has very
different views.
And when the president of the
United States
says words, words matter.
And you have this strange image
of his major
security officials and Cabinet
officials running
around telling everybody,
actually, don't
listen to the president of the
United States.
And then two seconds later, the
president
tweets something or had that
strange, rambling
press conference, and everybody
gets nervous
once again, because everything
seemed to be
-- you could turn everything
upside down in
a minute.
So this is really the problem.
I mean, Trump has surrounded
himself with
a lot of basically sensible,
traditional security
figures.
He's just done it again with
McMaster.
A lot of them are either
businessmen, who
don't really know diplomacy, or
they're generals,
who have a very strict notion of
diplomacy,
which usually starts with a gun.
And they're dealing with a whole
network of
European officials who are used
to American
leadership beginning from the
top and American
support for the idea of a Europe
which is
free, which has shared
sovereignty, which
is in America's interests.
I mean, Trump seems to talk, as
far as they're
concerned, about every alliance
being transactional,
that it's a debt to pay or a
bill.
NATO isn't about bills.
America's part of NATO because
it's in America's
interests.
And America does pay quite a
lot, but it has
Asian interests, it has lots of
other defense
interests.
And, in fact, the Europeans are
paying more.
The price is less of an issue
than the efficiency
of the spending and the way it's
actually
used, particularly in the face
of new threats
from Russia.
And Trump's bromance with
Vladimir Putin shakes
people a great deal, though they
don't like
to talk about it.
They don't really understand it.
But in the face of more
aggressive Russia,
of cyber-warfare, of fake news,
of the misuse
of social media -- or the use of
social media
to undermine allied leaders like
Angela Merkel
or the British government or the
European
Union itself, these are really
troubling things
for people.
So, it's great for Vice
President Pence to
come and Jim Mattis to come and
basically
issue the kinds of platitudes
that most American
leaders and administrations have
rarely had
to do.
But even those platitudes were
greeted with
some relief by people, though
they do wait
for the next Trump statement
about some terrorist
attack in Sweden that actually
never happened
or how NATO is somehow about
paying bills
and not about mutual defense.
JOHN YANG: Steve, as you look
across the European
capitals, is there one country
or one nation
-- or what nations are more
concerned than
others about what's going on now
with the
Trump administration?
STEVEN ERLANGER: Well, I would
say right now
it's Germany, because Germany is
in the middle
of an election campaign that
will climax in
September.
And Angela Merkel is running for
a fourth
term.
And she has been weakened by the
migrant crisis
and simple fatigue.
And yet she is the person who is
most seen
as the strongest figure in
Europe, not just
in terms of the power of Germany
and the economy
of Germany, but in standing up
to Moscow and
Putin over Ukraine and Crimea.
She's been crucial in keeping
the sanctions
against Russia over its
annexation of Crimea
and current activities.
And there is a sense in Germany
that Trump,
for whatever reason, doesn't
care for her.
And he's very much a lover of
Brexit.
There's a suspicion that somehow
his real
sympathies are with the
alternative right,
and not with the people who are
keeping Europe
strong.
JOHN YANG: Steve Erlanger with
The New York
Times, we have to leave it
there.
Steve, great to see you again.
STEVEN ERLANGER: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Perhaps the
biggest campaign
promise President Trump has
called for action
on is building a wall along the
U.S.-Mexico
border.
Jean Guerrero of KPBS and the
Fronteras desk
-- it's a public media
partnership -- discovers
crossing the border is already a
dangerous
journey, as she joins a group of
immigrants
patrolling vast swathes of
desert from California
to Arizona.
JEAN GUERRERO: Marco Antonio
Garcia vanished
while crossing the border weeks
ago.
Maximo Garcia shows me a text
message from
a drug mule with a crucial clue
about his
missing grand-nephew.
MAN: "Look for him in the coyote
arroyo near
the border, where there's some
fencing."
JEAN GUERRERO: A drug mule using
Garcia's
phone said he'd found the young
man's body
and phone in the Arizona desert.
These men have volunteered to
search for him.
We are now starting our search
for Marco Antonio.
We drive into the desert, on our
way to hike
along one of the most dangerous
smuggling
routes near the U.S.-Mexico
border.
MAN (through translator): If we
find him,
it's bad news for me.
If we don't find him, it's bad
news either
way.
JEAN GUERRERO: The volunteers
prepare their
gear for hours of walking in
100-degree heat.
They stock up on water and ice.
They call themselves Aguilas del
Desierto,
or Eagles of the Desert.
They're plumbers, farmers,
construction workers.
Most are immigrants who live in
San Diego.
They spend their weekends
rescuing migrants
or recovering their bodies as
far away as
Arizona.
ELY ORTIZ, Founder, Aguilas del
Desierto (through
translator): So, their relatives
will stop
having uncertainty about, what
happened to
my relative to give them that
peace.
JEAN GUERRERO: Founder Ely Ortiz
started the
group after his own brother,
Rigoberto, disappeared
trying to enter the U.S. through
here in 2009.
His coyote, or human smuggler,
confessed he'd
abandoned Rigoberto during his
last breaths.
ELY ORTIZ (through translator):
I would think,
where's my brother?
What happened to him?
How did he die?
A thousand thoughts went through
my head.
And I told myself, I'm not going
to leave
my brother lying out there.
JEAN GUERRERO: Ortiz called the
Mexican consulates,
Border Patrol and other
agencies.
ELY ORTIZ (through translator):
I asked everyone
for help, and nobody would help
me.
JEAN GUERRERO: So he went out on
foot, with
the help of human rights
activist named Rafael
Hernandez.
Together, they found his
brother's body.
It was closure for the Ortiz
family.
Inspired, Ortiz launched Aguilas
del Desierto.
He chose the name Aguilas
because of the eagle's
powerful eyesight and wingspan.
His volunteers walk into the
desert.
Some stay with the cars to
rescue us if necessary.
Ortiz reminds us not to lose
sight of each
other, for safety.
Along the coyote arroyo, the
earth is unusually
fertile for a desert.
It's one of the most transited
border routes
precisely because there's so
much vegetation
for cover.
But that means it's also
impossible to follow
Ortiz's mandate to keep an eye
on each other.
There's people to my left inside
of the brush
and to my right.
Signs of migrants are
everywhere, tossed Red
Bulls, backpacks, dolls.
Here's a toy.
And drug mules' shoes with
carpet strips on
the bottom to cover tracks.
There are all over the place.
Most prevalent are these black
gallon jugs,
which smugglers sell as a sort
of supernatural,
strength-inducing water.
I'm following a volunteer named
Jose Genis.
He says it's hard to spot bodies
in this area
because of all the foliage.
Dying migrants often crawl
beneath trees seeking
shade.
JOSE GENIS, Volunteer: And it
makes it difficult
for us to find them because they
kind of blend
in, especially after a body has
been decomposing.
JEAN GUERRERO: Genis is a Navy
veteran and
a licensed EMT.
On previous searches, he has
found dehydrated
migrants trying to enter the
U.S. illegally.
He has helped save their lives,
treating them
until Border Patrol could come
take them to
the hospital.
JOSE GENIS: I feel American,
but, at the same
time, I have my roots from
Mexico, so I try
to help out as much as I can.
JEAN GUERRERO: The heat is
oppressive, even
through the trees.
There are snakes and scorpions
and cattle
skeletons.
We keep losing each other.
We repeatedly have to stop and
regroup, finding
each other by blowing whistles.
We have to make it out before
sunset, when
smugglers inhabit this terrain.
But we're not covering nearly
enough ground.
JOSE GENIS: If anything, we have
one-and-a-quarter
miles.
JEAN GUERRERO: We press on.
Genis and I find a Bible
crawling with insects.
I wonder if the person who
dropped it made
it out of this desert alive.
Hundreds of people die crossing
the border
each year from things like
dehydration or
hypothermia.
In Arizona alone, the death
count is astounding.
Official figures exclude the
countless bodies
that are never found.
Ev Meade of the Trans Border
Institute says
border deaths since the 1990s
range as high
as 10,000.
EV MEADE, Trans Border
Institute: Yes, this
is a large number of people.
And this is the kind of number
we talk about
when we talk about an armed
conflict or a
war.
JEAN GUERRERO: He says the
deaths are linked
to U.S. border fence
construction.
Border crossing deaths were
almost unheard
of until the U.S. built long
stretches of
border fence in the '90s.
Today, about 700 miles of the
2,000-mile border
are fenced, mostly around
cities.
This has forced migrants onto
remote, dangerous
routes through the desert, with
its extreme
temperatures.
President Donald Trump has
already signed
a directive to start building a
border wall.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
We're going to build the wall.
JEAN GUERRERO: Meade says
Trump's wall could
increase migrant deaths by
funneling them
onto still more dangerous
crossing routs.
Some are dying on the way.
EV MEADE: We just really haven't
had a serious
policy discussion or a public
discussion about
the humanitarian consequences of
the building
of the wall.
JEAN GUERRERO: Back in the
desert, we pass
barbed-wire fencing.
Could it be the fencing referred
to in the
text message?
Suddenly, someone finds
something.
I scramble up a hill, following
Genis.
It might be him, but we don't
know.
First, I see the skull.
A few meters away are the legs,
clothed in
pants.
The body has been torn apart by
coyotes or
some other animal.
Genis says the body looks like
it's been decomposing
for about a month.
Marco Antonio disappeared a
month ago.
MAXIMO GARCIA, Volunteer
(through translator):
Unfortunately, we just found
remains of a
human being.
We're going to investigate to
see if it's
him.
JEAN GUERRERO: Garcia calls his
relatives
to tell them what we have found.
The Aguilas get to work.
They can't touch the body.
It could be a crime scene.
They note the coordinates of the
remains,
which they will share with local
police.
Officials will pick up the body
and take it
to the medical examiner for DNA
analyses.
The men improvise a marker out
of a balloon
they find to help officials spot
the body.
Back at the vehicles, Garcia
thanks the Aguilas
for the search.
He says they were the only
people willing
to help him.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jean
Guerrero
along the U.S.-Mexican border.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
fighting disease
in the most polluted city on
Earth; and why
are presidential sculptures
sitting on an
empty patch of land in rural
Virginia?
Today is February 20, one month
into the new
Trump administration.
It's an early moment to pause
and ask where
things stand.
For that, we turn to our
Politics Monday team,
Tamara Keith of NPR and Amy
Walter of The
Cook Political Report.
And welcome to both of you.
It is Monday.
We are already a month, as we
just said, Amy
and Tam, into this
administration.
So, let's take a little bit of
stock.
Tam, you have been looking at
the president's
appointments for big, important
positions,
the positions that have to be
confirmed by
the Senate.
What are you seeing?
How is he doing compared to
other presidents
at this point?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: In terms
of getting them confirmed, he is
behind schedule.
That's not entirely his fault.
Senate Democrats have been
slow-walking the
nominations, in part because
they say that
many of these nominees are sort
of out of
line with the mainstream.
Mitch McConnell, the Senate
Republican leader,
just the other day said that
this is the most
conservative Cabinet he's seen.
Democrats take that as
validation of their
arguments.
But in terms of broadly, beyond
just the Cabinet,
the Senate-confirmed positions,
President
Trump has named 34 people so
far.
That is just slightly behind
pace of President
Obama and ahead of the pace of
President Bill
Clinton and President George W.
Bush.
So he's not actually behind,
despite many
stories saying, oh, my gosh,
he's behind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because you look
at some of
the numbers.
You said 500 -- you were telling
us 515 awaiting
confirmation, the 34 they have
named, and
20 of them are still waiting.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, there is
a lot of
focus on these numbers.
How much does it matter?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: I think
there is the story about the
process and then
there's the story about the
perception.
And I think that, as we learned
from Tam,
the process, he's not that far
off.
If you look, again, academic
studies, President
Obama, by his first 100 days,
only had about
17 percent of his appointees in.
So, it's not the pace that's the
problem.
It's the perception that there's
chaos here.
Some of it is about the people
that he's chosen
who have visions or views that
are different
from the president's.
Ideologically, we don't really
still know
where the president is on a
whole lot of issues,
where his North Star is.
And so, as you pointed out,
today, you had
the secretary of defense go to
Iraq and say,
I know that the president
himself has said
we're going to come take your
oil.
Don't worry.
That's one reason for that.
The other is a lot of talk about
this loyalty
test, so-called loyalty test for
people who
want to be in high-level
positions.
Every president wants somebody
that is loyal
to them.
There is nothing wrong or
different about
that.
What is different, though, is
that it seems
to be taken to a level like we
haven't seen
before.
If you have written or said
anything during
the course of the campaign that
was critical
of Donald Trump, you are not
going to be appointed
or you may lose a job that you
have been appointed
for once they find out what you
have actually
said.
So I think that's what lends
this idea that
this is sort of a Cabinet or a
process in
chaos.
TAMARA KEITH: And there were so
many people
in the so-called establishment,
so the people
that would be in line for these
sorts of positions,
that spoke out against Trump
during the campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
There's a lot of material out
there to work
with.
But, Tam, he said at his news
conference last
week: I have gotten more
accomplished in the
first four weeks of my time in
office than,
he said, some presidents have
done in their
entire term.
I think a lot of people thought
that was hyperbole
and let him get away with a
little of that.
But what has he accomplished?
What have we seen?
We have seen a few executive
orders.
Legislation is not there yet.
TAMARA KEITH: Legislation is
definitely not
there yet.
And at least one of those
executive orders
is on hold pending court action.
And now President Trump, with
the travel ban,
is planning some time soon to do
a new one
that would get around some of
the legal challenges.
But, yes, things he has done,
the Keystone
XL pipeline and Dakota Access
pipeline, he
signed that executive order.
It's not legislation, but it is
that something
that was on hold and is moving.
So, there is a new president in
town.
He is able to do some things
just simply by
being there and by not being
Barack Obama.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Amy?
AMY WALTER: And there still is a
legislative
process to this.
He wants to build a border wall,
we have got
to pay for that.
It has to go through a
legislative process
to appropriate that money.
You want to get rid of
Obamacare?
We know that there is a whole
process legislatively
that's involved with that.
So, he's setting the ball
rolling, but you
still need Congress and, of
course, the courts
to go along with your
procedures.
The other piece of this -- and I
feel like
a broken record, Judy -- we have
talked about
this almost every time I'm on.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will forgive
you.
We don't think you're a broken
record.
AMY WALTER: But part of it, too,
is the reason
we're not talking so much about
what he's
done in three weeks is that he
steps on his
message more than anybody else
does.
Again, a more traditional
president would
come in and they would spend
every single
morning waking up and talking
about the two
or three or four issues they
want to talk
about.
Instead, it's attacks on the
media.
It's tweets that go even above
and beyond
just simple attacks on the
media, calling
them an enemy of the people.
And so the issue is, if he wants
to talk about
what he's accomplished, he has
to have the
discipline, the president needs
discipline to focus on those
issues day in
and out and let the people
around him not
put out fires, but actually
focus on talking
about and pushing ahead on this
agenda.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, he pulls out
of the Trans-Pacific
Partnership, the trade deal, for
example,
but we don't hear -- we're not
hearing...
AMY WALTER: We hear a little bit
about it,
but there has to be a
replacement, which is,
he says: I'm going to do
bilateral deals.
OK.
Let's see what they look like.
We still -- look, we're only a
month in, but
that's what we have to look for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, one thing
you could argue
he's done, Tam, is stir up the
anger and frustration
of a lot of Democrats, or at
least people
who are opposed to him.
We don't know if they're
Democrats or Republicans.
There was another one of those
sets of protests
today.
We have got a map.
In fact, around the country,
there were a
number of protests in cities.
People called it the president's
-- this is
-- Not My President's Day.
How much anti-Trump energy is
there out there?
And can we tell if this is
something that
has legs?
Is it going to last?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, clearly,
there is anti-Trump
energy.
There is also energy showing up
at many of
these town halls that members of
Congress
are having.
I think that we don't know, if
it's real,
whether it's the new Tea Party,
whether it
sticks.
And, in part, we don't know
whether the Democratic
Party is going to be able to
capitalize on
this energy because at the
moment there is
not really a leader of the
Democratic Party.
They're in the middle of an
election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
it?
AMY WALTER: Yes, I absolutely
agree with that.
And we have to watch and see
where this energy
goes.
And for those folks who watched
in 2009 these
raucous town halls and said,
well, it's probably
not going to be much of
anything, obviously,
that was proven wrong.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Tea Party.
AMY WALTER: All of -- the Tea
Party emerged
in 2010.
Donald Trump, all of his
rallies, oh, well,
maybe they're not such a big
deal.
Clearly, underneath all of it,
there was a
great deal of energy for Donald
Trump that
we were able to physically see.
But I agree with Tamara.
We have got to see where this
goes.
The challenge for Democrats is
not that they
don't have energy.
They have a geography problem.
And the states that they need to
win in order
to take control of the Senate or
in order
to win seats in the House, maybe
even control
Congress, are red states on the
Senate side,
and then states that are really
-- or districts
that are really Republican.
That's the challenge.
So, what we're seeing is two
sides really,
really fired up.
That doesn't help Democrats.
What Democrats need is to see
Republicans
become depressed and fall out of
love with
Donald Trump.
That hasn't happened.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The geography
problem, you
have written about this.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter,
Tamara Keith, great
to see you both.
Thank you.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: India's capital,
Delhi, now
outranks Beijing as the world's
most polluted
large metropolis.
And it's taking a toll on its
resident's health.
But, as special correspondent
Fred de Sam
Lazaro reports, there are
efforts under way
to make the city's air less
toxic.
It's part of his ongoing series
Agents for
Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He murmurs
and he gasps,
waiting for a spot to free up,
for a chance
to just breathe.
As nebulizer treatments open up
the lungs
of a handful of patients, dozens
more await
their turn at the chest clinic
in a Delhi
government hospital.
This is the scene outside of the
doctor's
office.
Clinic hours are 9:00 in the
morning until
1:00.
And on a typical day, the doctor
says he sees
about 120 patients who've been
here before
and 30 brand-new ones.
Three to four patients are seen
at the same
time, in the same room, by Dr.
Raj Kumar and
his team of junior doctors and
residents.
The most common complaint?
Simply change of season, the
winter, which
brings dust and tiny carbon
particulates into
the environment
DR.
RAJ KUMAR, India: When there is
a change in
environment or increase in the
particulate
matter and everything, these
asthmatic and
COPD patients do get
exacerbation of their
symptoms.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They get
exacerbation
of their symptoms?
DR.
RAJ KUMAR: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Dr. Kumar
can do little
more than check on their
medications and advise
patients to avoid some of the
most polluted
outdoor air on the planet.
Weather and wind patterns are
blamed for trapping
pollutants over India's capital,
carbon dioxide,
ozone and fine carbon particles.
Dirty fuels are the culprit from
several sources.
Automobiles are the major one.
On average, 1,400 new vehicles
are added to
Delhi's streets every day, most
now burning
a highly polluting diesel long
outlawed in
Europe and the United States.
By 2021, diesel fuel here will
meet European
standards.
The government has also promised
to shut down
old coal-fired plants and
restrict new ones.
And wood- and coal-burning brick
kilns has
been moved farther away from the
city.
But the pollution continues.
To get an idea of how polluted
the air is,
we went to one of the cleanest
places in Delhi,
the American Embassy School.
It serves the children of
American and other
expats and diplomats.
Many don face masks, but only
until they're
inside, says the director, Ellen
Stern.
ELLEN STERN, Director, American
Embassy School:
We have an air system that goes
all the way
through the school.
We now have four different kinds
of filters
on it that filter out various
kinds of things.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Barun
Aggarwal showed
me the elaborate system his
company, BreatheEasy,
has set up in the school,
pulling out the
first layer of filter, thickly
coated with
a grimy soot.
So, if you were to walk outside
today, this
is what is coming into your
lungs?
BARUN AGGARWAL, BreatheEasy:
Absolutely.
Most of the black carbon
actually passes through
a filter like this.
This is mostly dust.
And the black carbon will get
trapped in the
finer particle filters.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So, how old
is this accumulation?
BARUN AGGARWAL: Less than six
days.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The fine
particle filters
also show stark before-and-after
evidence
of the harmful air outside.
You would think such systems
would be in strong
demand, but Aggarwal says, aside
from a few
buildings mostly occupied by
expats, its been
a hard sell.
Among India's growing middle
class, he says,
he's there's denial or
indifference, a sense
that pollution is the price of
India's rapid
economic progress.
BARUN AGGARWAL: The number of
myths that are
there with regards to air
pollution in India
are incredible.
The first one that I get by
mostly Indians
is that, if I breathe clean air
for eight
hours, then my immunity will
come down, and
when I go out, I will fall sick.
Completely wrong, because this
is -- if you
believe that, then you should be
giving your
children two packets of
cigarettes to smoke
every day.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The problem,
like cigarette
smoking is, except for those
with lung disease,
the health consequences of
pollution, such
as lung and heart disease and
stroke, come
later in life.
KAMAL MEATTLE, Environmental
Activist: It'll
happen in 10, 20, 30 years.
So if you ask a 20-year-old, is
this important,
they say, no, no, no, forget it.
I have to make money.
I have to get ahead in life.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Kamal
Meattle is an environmental
activist who also designed the
embassy school's
filtration system.
It works well, he says, but it
is no panacea
for a city of 20-plus million
residents.
KAMAL MEATTLE: You cannot have
just air purifiers
and cleaning systems for the
people who can
afford them.
It has to be for the people who
are on the
road, who are in (INAUDIBLE)
slums.
And they have to be dealing with
people who
go on motorcycles, go on metros,
go on buses.
They're the ones who are exposed
most to the
pollution.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Meattle, who
trained at
MIT, has developed lower-cost
ways to cope
with the pollution, which we
measured just
outside an office building he
owns in central
Delhi, using an instrument used
to measure
fine carbon particles.
KAMAL MEATTLE: Two-ninety, 288.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: What is the
WHO standard?
KAMAL MEATTLE: It's 50.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So, what you
have outside
your building...
KAMAL MEATTLE: Six times.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: ... is an
air quality
that's six times worse than the
WHO standard?
KAMAL MEATTLE: That's right.
That's right.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Can we step
back inside
and see what it's like inside?
From 290, the level dropped to
nine, thanks
not just to filters and air
purifiers, but
to plants, thousands of them in
this rooftop
greenhouse.
But this greenhouse produces
clean air, and
each floor is pulling it in as
needed.
KAMAL MEATTLE: Yes.
And there are plants on each
floor also.
This is the central air cleaning
system for
the whole building.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Plants do
more than produce
oxygen, he says.
They are natural air purifiers.
Their roots eat bacteria and
fungi and they
absorb chemicals like
formaldehyde and benzene
produced by office products.
KAMAL MEATTLE: These are areca
palms for the
day time, bamboo palm.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Most
importantly, he says,
these are common, fast-growing
species and
should be in every home for
clean air benefits
to both lungs and brains.
KAMAL MEATTLE: Harvard and also
University
of California at Berkeley have
done studies
to show that your cognitive
abilities improve
in such an environment.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They're
small steps people
can take indoors, but he
acknowledges there's
a huge complex problem outside
these clean
air bubbles, not easily solved
in India's
chaotic democracy.
KAMAL MEATTLE: I think its
politicians anywhere
in the world, they think the
same, that they
will only act when they have
learned a solution
and it's a very straightforward
solution.
Then they will implement it and
take credit
for it.
But until they find that they
don't -- or
they know that they don't have a
clean, straight
solution, they will keep the
matter confused.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But
environmentalists
say years of lobbying seem to be
yielding
some results, helped by prodding
from India's
Supreme Court, which has
compelled government
agencies to act.
One group claiming the credit
says it distributed
pollution gauges to prominent
Delhiites.
Its leader, Sunita Narain, says
campaign targets
included the court.
SUNITA NARAIN, Activist: We took
the machine
in.
We put the machine there.
And the chief justice said, this
is unacceptable.
So I think, slowly, that sense
of unacceptable,
this is not right, this is not
fair, it's
increasing the burden of health
on our children,
we have to change it, that's
happened.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But, in the
meantime,
for years to come, India's
capital and, for
that matter, most of its major
cities will
continue to be among the most
difficult places
on Earth to breathe.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in New Delhi.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's reporting
is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at the
University of St. Thomas in
Minnesota.
The Oscars are this coming
Sunday.
One of the best picture
favorites is a coming-of-age
story that's been honored for
its approach
to dealing with sexual identity
and race.
"Moonlight" grabbed its latest
award last
night: best screenplay from the
Writers Guild
of America.
It's up for eight Oscars.
Jeffrey Brown sat down with the
filmmakers
this fall.
Here's a second look for our
series Beyond
the Red Carpet.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a life we
don't often
see portrayed in commercial
films, a coming-of-age
tale of love and anguish, a
movie that's garnered
critical acclaim for the story
it tells and
the beauty and power of its
telling.
In "Moonlight," we watch Chiron
growing up
in the Liberty City neighborhood
of Miami
as the crack epidemic is taking
hold in the
1980s.
He is young, poor, black, and
coming to terms
with being gay, quietly and
painfully wrestling
with these identities.
The story is based on the life
of Tarell Alvin
McCraney, who first wrote it as
a play and
then the screenplay for the new
film.
TARELL ALVIN MCCRANEY,
Screenwriter, "Moonlight":
It's a story that I still feel
like I have
to tell, but also that I have to
explore and
to understand.
I mean, it's a story rooted in
events in my
own life that I'm trying to make
sense of
and make sense of the world out
of.
And I think, for me, I always am
interested
in trying to get a group of
people to have
the same conversation.
BARRY JENKINS, Director,
"Moonlight": So,
Tarell and I grew up blocks from
one another.
JEFFREY BROWN: Director Barry
Jenkins, who
also grew up poor in Liberty
City at the same
time, and with a mother fighting
addiction,
presents the story in three
separate acts,
using three different actors to
play Chiron.
At the new Museum of African
American History
and Culture, where the film was
recently screened,
he told me he purposely kept the
actors from
watching one another.
BARRY JENKINS: One of the themes
of the film
for me is about the way society
is shaping
these young men from our
communities, through
positive reinforcement, negative
reinforcement.
This is what masculinity looks
like.
This is what it sounds like.
And so much time passes between
each story
that I feel like the world has
shaped this
character into a different
person.
So, I wanted to cast different
people to play
the same person, and I wanted
them to be different.
JEFFREY BROWN: We watch Chiron
grow through
high school, tormented by
bullies and his
own insecurities, living with a
mother, played
by Naomie Harris, who sinks more
and more
into addiction.
NAOMIE HARRIS, Actress: What's
wrong?
ACTOR: Nothing.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is a young
man who speaks
more loudly in his looks and
silences than
in words.
BARRY JENKINS: The power of
cinema is that
we get to watch people, you
know?
And we get to watch people,
like, in close-up.
And so, if there's a scene on
the stage, the
audience can't get right in an
actor's eyes.
But in cinema, they can.
And I think, because of that,
because of the
power of the feeling in a
person's eyes, you
know, they can be doing --
active.
They can be less active, and yet
revealing
so much more.
I think of "Moonlight," it's
like an iceberg
film.
You know the Hemingway phrase,
you know, 10
percent is above water, and 90
percent is
below?
We flip it upside-down.
You know, we want to show you
that 90 percent
below water, but it's moving
very, very slow.
You know, it's a patient film.
But the character is revealing
himself by
these terms and his expressions.
TREVANTE RHODES, Actor: What you
looking at
me like that for?
ACTOR: What, man?
Come on, you just drove down
here?
TREVANTE RHODES: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: The adult Chiron
is played
by Trevante Rhodes, a one-time
track and field
star at the University of Texas
who only found
his way into acting his senior
year.
TREVANTE RHODES: I think the
beauty of that
scene was Chiron, he didn't
know.
JEFFREY BROWN: An outgoing and
gregarious
man, he told me how he
approached playing
a character so different.
TREVANTE RHODES: So, for me, it
was really
just about walking around L.A.
with the three
weeks I had prior to filming
feeling as if
-- feeling as if I had a secret
to hide from
everyone?
JEFFREY BROWN: You were walking
around feeling
and getting into the character.
TREVANTE RHODES: Walking around
L.A., getting
in the character, walking
around, feeling
as if I had this secret, feeling
as if I connected
with someone.
They would be able to see
through me.
They would be able to see my
insecurities.
They would be able to see this
mask that I
was putting up.
They would be able to see all of
these things,
and they would take the power
away from me,
feeling as if I couldn't love
myself, because
Chiron had this self-hate.
And because of that, he couldn't
love others.
So, I feel that all of us really
relate to
Chiron in the sense that we all,
at some point,
are insecure about something in
our life,
you know?
And I'm someone who I try to
make sense of
everything, and I feel like
Chiron tends to
do the same thing, just in a
different way.
The context is a bit different.
NAOMIE HARRIS: And who is you?
MAHERSHALA ALI, Actor: Nobody.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another
compelling character
is Juan, played by Mahershala
Ali, a drug
dealer stepping in as a father
figure to the
young Chiron.
MAHERSHALA ALI: Some boys chased
him in the
cut.
He's scared more than anything.
JEFFREY BROWN: Juan was based on
someone McCraney
knew as a child.
TARELL ALVIN MCCRANEY: It often
pains me to
know that people sort of see
him, and go,
oh, that's unusual.
When I think -- when I think
back over my
life, I think, oh, but there
have been many
times I have run into many
people like him
who are reflections of him in my
mind.
And I hear other people go, no,
I had a person
in my life like that, too.
So, I keep thinking, well, what
are we doing?
Why are we silencing that story?
Why -- what is happening to us
that we're
not seeing him more often?
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you feel this
is a film
that could have been made five
years ago,
10 years ago?
BARRY JENKINS: I mean, the one
thing I can
stand up on is, I couldn't have
made it five
years ago or 10 years ago.
I don't think I was
intellectually or emotionally
capable at that point.
I mean, he had written the
piece.
But I don't know how many people
you had shared
it with.
TARELL ALVIN MCCRANEY: I'm
shaking my head
because I had it 10 years ago,
and it didn't
get made.
BARRY JENKINS: I do think that,
right now,
there's a time in this country
when I think
people, they want to see beyond
the barriers
of their own experience, you
know?
And I think that this country is
a place where
many voices are being sought.
I think the voice of this
character is one
in particular that people
haven't heard very
often.
And they're curious.
And then they go and they see
the film, and
they go, that voice is kind of
similar to
mine.
I kind of relate to this guy,
even though
I don't want to sit next to him
on the subway.
Maybe I will next time.
TARELL ALVIN MCCRANEY: And now I
think we're
in a moment where everyone has
to understand
that authenticity is key,
because, when you
come to the table truthfully,
then we can
kind of -- we see that there's
actually -- we
illuminate that there's actually
more room
for voices, rather than that
just one voice
that we heard previous.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Moonlight" is up
for eight
Academy Awards, including best
picture, on
February 26.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
Some people collect stamps, some
coins, or,
in the case of our founding
co-anchor, Jim
Lehrer, anything to do with
buses.
But one Virginia man owns dozens
of giant
sculptures of our nation's
commanders in chief.
To mark President's Day, the
"NewsHour"'s
Julia Griffin has paid his
collection a visit.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Cracked and
crumbling, battered
and broken, these are the faces
of Presidents
Park.
The 10-acre tourist destination
outside of
Colonial Williamsburg opened in
2004.
The main attraction?
Forty-three Texas-sized busts of
presidents
past by Houston artist David
Adickes.
Utility contractor Howard
Hankins helped build
the original park.
HOWARD HANKINS, Utility
Contractor: The eyes
look like they're staring at
you, just gazing
at you.
It's incredible how big they are
and lifelike.
JULIA GRIFFIN: The statues are
big, but attendance
was low, and the venture went
belly up in
2010.
When the Presidents Park was
forced to close,
the presidential busts were
destined for a
landfill.
Rather than let that happen,
Hankins decide
to bring them here, to his
family farm in
Virginia.
But the steel and concrete
sculptures weigh
between 15,000 and 20,000
pounds, and moving
them wasn't exactly an easy
lift.
HOWARD HANKINS: I got a ladder,
climbed up
on top, popped a hole in their
head, and rocked
them loose from the frame with
about a 70,000-pound
machine, and picked them up and
put them on
my lowboys and brought them
here.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Abraham Lincoln,
in particular,
took a beating.
HOWARD HANKINS: Lincoln over
there, we dropped
him on his -- back of his head.
We had tires to cushion him, and
the chain
broke, and we dropped him.
JULIA GRIFFIN: The busts can be
repaired.
But, for now, Hankins lets the
elements take
their toll.
HOWARD HANKINS: Being out of
concrete, the
water gets in and freezes and
cracks them.
They kind of have character the
way they are,
I mean, a little mold and moss
on them and
crack here and there.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Even though it's
private land,
intrepid explorers, with their
selfie sticks,
still flock to the farm for a
glimpse of the
stone-faced leaders.
HOWARD HANKINS: I have to tell
them, this
is not a site to visit.
And I'm nice as I can be.
I will let them walk around and
look.
And they try to climb on them,
and no climbing
on the statues, please.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Rather than
relegate the busts
to an unofficial tourist
attraction, Hankins
recently started raising funds
for a new park
outside of Richmond, one that
will include
two new additions, Presidents
Barack Obama
and Donald Trump.
Until then, Hankins will keep a
close watch
over his commanders in- chief.
HOWARD HANKINS: Yes, these guys
seem to get
along out here pretty well.
I don't see anybody fight.
JULIA GRIFFIN: It's all
bipartisan, though?
HOWARD HANKINS: Yes, very good
people.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Once they retire.
HOWARD HANKINS: They all listen
to me.
(LAUGHTER)
JULIA GRIFFIN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Julia Griffin in Croaker,
Virginia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's another
way of thinking
about our presidents.
And on the "NewsHour" online
right now, we
test your knowledge of all
things presidential
with our President's Day quiz.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
It's not easy.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.